GUIDES 

Basic Pelvic 

The pelvic floor is a group of muscles that attaches to the bones at the bottom of your pelvis. These muscles form a hammock across the base of the pelvis that supports the internal organs above it. Having strong and flexible pelvic floor muscles gives you proper control over your bladder and bowels, improve sexual performance and orgasm, help stabilize the hip joints, and act as a lymphatic pump for the pelvis. 

Your pelvic floor impacts not just your physical well-being, but also your emotional health. 
In Eastern traditions, the pelvic floor is known as the root chakra - it's where we tend to literally "hold" fears, specifically fears around primary instincts such as our health, safety, and our financial security. It is a "stress container," in that it's where we process the emotion and house our fight or flight reactions. 

When we are in a reactive state of stress, our natural biological reaction is to subconsciously clutch the pelvic floor. This clutching then sends out a system-wide message that throws our body into the sympathetic nervous system state of fight or flight, which accelerates the aging process, is exhausting, and makes us live in a reactive state.

Just like a clenched fist cannot grasp, a too-tight pelvic floor is unable to support the proper positioning and optimal function of the pelvic organs, bones, and vertebrae. When we clutch our pelvic floor, its hammock-like base pulls up and in like a rosebud. While you do want the ability to clutch this area sometimes, it's important that it also has the ability and space to expand and bloom like a flower as well. If you learn to isolate these muscles with a brain-body connection, you can have more power to control how you experience stress.


Use ROOT to incorporate pelvic floor exercises into your life until they become second nature. 

While this app was created to improve the physical and emotional well-being of people with vaginas, please note that all of the tools and information will still apply to you, regardless of gender. :) 


Kegel 

Before you can release and enhance the well-being of your pelvic floor, first you have to feel it and connect with it. 

Close your eyes and visualize the muscles at the base of your core, between your sitz bones, that you would use to cut your pee off midstream. Without using your butt or abs, contract your rosebud, pull it up into your body, and hold it. You should feel a tightening around your vagina. 

Contrast this move by letting go of the muscles, feeling space between your site bones, and allowing your rose to loom. Feel the base of your core real, and then relax and expand a little more from there until you experience a complete surrender or holding. You will feel your belly relax, your shoulders melt, and your jaw and head release. 



Deep Squat 

Stand with your feet slightly wider than your hips, toes pointed slightly outward. Keep your spine in a neutral position - don't round you back, and don't over accentuate the natural arch of your back. Balance your weight on the heels and balls of your feet. 

With your hands in the prayer position and taking a deep breath, being sending your hips backwards as your knees begin to bend. Keep your back straight, and your chest and shoulders up. Be sure to keep your knees directly in line with your feet as you squat. Continue lowering your hips until they are slightly lower than your knees to perform a deep squat. Use your core to push yourself back up, keeping your weight in your heels. 












































